update architecture doc (#19)
redhat-et/TKM: docs/design/architechture.md

# GPU Kernel Manager Operator, Agent and CSI Plugin Design

## Introduction

The GPU Kernel Manager (GKM) Operator, Agent and CSI Plugin manage GPU kernel
cache distribution and usage within a Kubernetes environment.
The Operator validates and inspects GPU kernel images, while the Agent
handles Kernel cache extraction from OCI Images, and the CSI Plugin handles
volume mounting the kernel images in pods.
The architecture follows a controller-runtime approach, leveraging Kubernetes
Custom Resources (CRs) and a CSI plugin to manage kernel images efficiently.

## Motivation

The primary motivation of the GPU Kernel Manager Operator, Agent and CSI
Plugin is to reduce the startup time of large language models (LLMs) that use
GPU Kernels.
By providing a pre-tuned kernel cache as a directory in a container that can

> be consumed by Triton-lang at runtime, we aim to optimize model loading,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be consumed by Triton or vLLM at runtime, we aim to optimize model loading,
```

I think we just keep it generic. otherwise we would need to dive into all the vllm components: inductor cache + triton cache...

| Extract kernel cache  |                | Mark CR as "Failed"   |
| from image to host    |                | with error details    |
|                       |                +-----------------------+
| Mark CR as "Ready"    |
| and "Compatible"      |
+-----------+-----------+
            |
            v
+-----------+-----------+
| Pod requests volume   |
| from CSI driver via   |
| CR name and namespace |
+-----------+-----------+
            |
            v
+-----------+-----------+
| CSI Driver searches   |
| host for CR directory |+---------------------------+
+-----------------------+                            |
            |                                        |
            v                                        v
+-----------+-----------+               +------------+-------------+
| Found, CSI Driver     |               | Not Found, CSI Driver    |
| mounts cache in pod   |               | returns error to request |
+-----------------------+               +--------------------------+
```

### Kernel Cache Extraction and CSI Mounting Behavior

The GKM Operator will make sure the OCI Image was properly signed using Cosign

> and the image provided is valid and has not been tamper with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the image provided is valid and has not been tampered with.
```

This will be done with a mutating webhook, so if the image is invalid, the
GKMCache (or ClusterGKMCache) CR will not be allowed to be created.

Once it is created, the GKM Agent will download the OCI Image and extract the
kernel cache from the image into a temporary directory on host.
From here, the GKM Agent will verify the kernel cache is compatible with the
GPU and associated drivers installed on the host.
The compatibility state will be written to the GKMCacheNode CR.
If incompatible, the kernel cache directory will be deleted.
If compatible, the kernel cache will be move to the default directory:

```console

> /run/tkm/caches/<namespace>/<cr-name>/

Author: Done

```

### Kernel Cache Extraction and CSI Mounting Behavior

The GKM Operator will make sure the OCI Image was properly signed using Cosign
and the image provided is valid and has not been tamper with.
This will be done with a mutating webhook, so if the image is invalid, the
GKMCache (or ClusterGKMCache) CR will not be allowed to be created.

Once it is created, the GKM Agent will download the OCI Image and extract the
kernel cache from the image into a temporary directory on host.
From here, the GKM Agent will verify the kernel cache is compatible with the
GPU and associated drivers installed on the host.
The compatibility state will be written to the GKMCacheNode CR.
If incompatible, the kernel cache directory will be deleted.
If compatible, the kernel cache will be move to the default directory:

```console
/run/tkm/caches/<namespace>/<cr-name>/
```

If the CR is cluster scoped (ClusterGKMCache), the `<namespace>` will be a fixed
string like `cluster-scoped`.

When a pod needing the kernel cache is scheduled (see
[Example Pod Spec Volume Request](#example-pod-spec-volume-request)
below for example yaml), Kubelet will call the registered CSI Driver with the `volumeAttributes`

> from the pod spec, which includes the name of the CR and it's namespace.

Author: Done

        driver: csi.tkm.io
        volumeAttributes:
          cacheName: kernel-x
          cacheNamespace: ml-apps
          readOnly: "false"
```

### Communication Between GKM Agent and CSI Driver

In the initial implementation, the CSI Driver will store data in files
on host in place of using a local database.
It is not expected that there is much data that needs to be stored.
After the initial PoC, if additional data needs to be stored, or data
contention issues arise, a proper database will be leveraged.

The CSI Driver needs a `VolumeId` mapping to the CR name and namespace.
The `VolumeId` is provided by Kubelet in the initial `NodePublishVolume()`
call, which requests the volume to be mounted.
This call also includes the `volumeAttributes`, which contain the CR name
and namespace.
Subsequent Kubelet calls (`NodeGetVolumeStats()` and `NodeUnpublishVolume()`)
only include the `VolumeId`, so the CSI driver needs the mapping to the CR name
and namespace.

To help the user with introspection and debugging, the GKM Agent will provide
usage data in the GKMCacheNode CR.
This data is only known by the CSI Driver, so the CSI Driver will also store
usage data in the files.

> The GKM Agent will have Read-only access to the files.

Author: Good starting place.

> The GKM Agent will have Read-only access to the files.

Author: Updated to indicated Agent will read periodically.

When a kernel cache is mounted in a pod, CSI Driver will record pod data in a file
in a mirror directory for GKM Agent to pull usage data from:

```console

> /run/tkm/usage/<namespace>/<cr-name>/usage.json

Reviewer: One file is good with me. The deck is the latest source of truth. I think we need to move out of `/run` though to `/var/lib/`

> /run/tkm/usage/<namespace>/<cr-name>/usage.json

Author: If the CSI Driver crashes and restarts, we want to know what pods are there, so we can read the files. If the node/server reboots, pods will be rescheduled and we want to come up fresh, so we want it cleaned out, right?

I don't remember if `/run` gets cleared out. If it doesn't, I think we want to move this to a directory that does get cleared out. Either way, I'll look and see if `/run` get wipes on reboot.

> /run/tkm/usage/<namespace>/<cr-name>/usage.json

Reviewer: So maybe we can just keep the usage part in /run like you suggest and then the rest of the cache stuff in /var/lib/...
